[Polkadot Wiki Migration] Getting Started - Introduction to the Polkadot SDK (#9)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: develop/parachain-devs/get-started/polkadot-sdk/get-started-psdk.md

---
title: Getting Started - Intro to the Polkadot SDK

> description: Get started with the Polkadot SDK, a comprehensive repository of libraries used for building on Polkadot and beyond.

Reviewer: Description has 116 characters. It should be between 120 and 160

---

> !!! danger "Not a production ready guide."
>     This section is under construction and moving!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! danger "Not a production ready guide."
    This section is under construction and moving.
```

    Agile coretime is only for the Kusama and testnet networks at the moment, and is not yet deployed on
    Polkadot. These guides are **not** production ready due to the moving nature of these features.

## Using the Polkadot SDK

The Polkadot SDK monorepo is composed of **three** repositories:

> - [**Polkadot**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html#polkadot){target=_blank} -
>   For a time, this included both the client implementation and runtime, until the runtime was moved
>   to the [Polkadot Fellows organization](https://github.com/polkadot-fellows/runtimes){target=_blank}.
> - [**Substrate**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html#substrate){target=_blank} -
>   The underlying, core primitives and libraries for building blockchains (any blockchain, not just
>   one for Polkadot). Polkadot itself is built with Substrate.
> - [**Cumulus**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html#cumulus){target=_blank} -
>   A set of libraries and tools which pertain specifically with connecting blockchains to Polkadot,
>   known as parachains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**Polkadot**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html#polkadot){target=\_blank} -
  for a time, this included both the client implementation and runtime, until the runtime was moved
  to the [Polkadot Fellows organization](https://github.com/polkadot-fellows/runtimes){target=\_blank}
- [**Substrate**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html#substrate){target=\_blank} -
  the underlying, core primitives and libraries for building blockchains (any blockchain, not just
  one for Polkadot). Polkadot itself is built with Substrate
- [**Cumulus**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html#cumulus){target=\_blank} -
  a set of libraries and tools which pertain specifically with connecting blockchains to Polkadot,
  known as parachains
```

> For an in-depth dive into the monorepo, the [Polkadot SDK Rust documentation](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html){target=_blank} is highly recommended

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an in-depth dive into the monorepo, the [Polkadot SDK Rust documentation](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html){target=\_blank} is highly recommended
```

<!-- TODO: Glossary link ParaId -->

## Zero to Hero with The Polkadot SDK

> The process of using the Polkadot SDK to deploying a parachain on a [core](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-agile-coretime#core){target=_blank} can be summarized as follows. It is also possible to build standalone blockchains with the Polkadot SDK:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process of using the Polkadot SDK to deploying a parachain on a [core](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-agile-coretime#core){target=\_blank} can be summarized as follows. It is also possible to build standalone blockchains with the Polkadot SDK:
```

1. **Reserving** a `ParaId`, where the runtime and genesis state will be uploaded
2. **Compiling** the runtime (written in Rust) to a WebAssembly blob, thereby defining how state transitions from one state to the next. This runtime is created using the Polkadot SDK
3. **Generating** a chain spec that is viable and ready to be deployed as a live, working parachain
4. **Generating** the genesis state and wasm
5. **Obtaining** a core through a [Coretime marketplace](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-guides-coretime-marketplaces){target=_blank}
6. **Assigning** that core to a `ParaId`

> 7. **Provisioning** at least one honest, synced collator is available for the task to begin producing blocks

Reviewer: I think it will be better to replace all the verbs to their imperative versions like `Assign`, `Reserve`, and so on

!!!info "What is a task?"

>     A task refers to a process utilizing Polkadot's compute. This could be a parachain or any other computational process, provided that it adheres to the Polkadot protocol. The full definition can be found on the [Polkadot Wiki](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-agile-coretime#task).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A [task](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-agile-coretime#task){target=\_blank} refers to a process utilizing Polkadot's compute. This could be a parachain or any other computational process, provided that it adheres to the Polkadot protocol.
```

### Deploying on a Core

> Once the desired runtime and pallets have been developed, it will be able to deploy it on a core, which is how one utilizes the shared security of the Polkadot network. One does so by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After developing the desired runtime and implementing the necessary pallets, the next step is to deploy your parachain on a Polkadot core. This deployment process is crucial as it allows your parachain to leverage the shared security model of the Polkadot network.
The deployment process involves several key steps:

```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph GA["Generate Artifacts"]
        direction LR
        A["Creating a runtime"]-->B["Generating a chain specification"]-->C["Generate Genesis State & Runtime Artifacts"]
    end

    subgraph PC["Procure ParaId & Core"]
        direction LR
        PARAID["Reserve ParaId"]
        PARAID-->D["Buy Bulk Coretime"]
        PARAID-->E["Issue On-Demand Coretime Extrinsic"]
    end

    subgraph DEP["Deploying"]
        direction LR
        F["Register artifacts to ParaId"]-->assign["Assign Core"]-->G["Sync collator"]-->H["Begin producing blocks"]
    end

GA-->PC
PC-->DEP
```

<!-- TODO: We should probably have a link to guides or something here, or build some track which has them go from template to core? -->

> <!-- TODO: Add a place / page to install the necessary dependencies -->

Reviewer: We should check where this page will be in the is and migrate/create it

Author: It is merged as of now: https://github.com/polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs/pull/24

### Install Dependencies

Ensure all necessary dependencies are installed.

<!-- TODO: Add a place / page to install the necessary dependencies -->

### Deployment Example - Adder Collator

> Try out the above by deploying the adder collator, a very simple "counter" parachain implementation.

Reviewer: We should link the example

## OpenZeppelin Templates & Guides

> OpenZeppelin offers a [generic parachain template](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/polkadot-generic-runtime-template){target=_blank}, which has support for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenZeppelin offers a [generic parachain template](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/polkadot-generic-runtime-template){target=\_blank}, which has support for:
```

- Proxy Pallet
- Multisig Pallet
- Governance support - a treasury, referenda (OpenGov!), and assets configuration
- Collation/Parachain Support
- XCM (Cross Consensus Messaging) Configuration and Support

> For more information, check their
> [Substrate parachain runtime guide.](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/substrate-runtimes/1.0.0/){target=_blank}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, check their
[Substrate Parachain Runtimes](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/substrate-runtimes/1.0.0/){target=\_blank} guide.
```

## Polkadot SDK Templates

> A full list of Polkadot SDK templates can be found within the [Rust documentation for the Polkadot SDK.](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/templates/index.html){target=_blank}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A full list of Polkadot SDK templates can be found within the [Rust documentation for the Polkadot SDK](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/templates/index.html){target=\_blank}.
```

---
title: Get Started with Polkadot SDK
description: Get started with the Polkadot SDK, a comprehensive repository providing all the components needed to start building on the Polkadot network.
---

# Get Started with Polkadot SDK

## Introduction

The Polkadot SDK is a powerful and versatile developer kit designed to facilitate building on the Polkadot network. It provides the necessary components for creating custom parachains, connecting them to Polkadot, and taking advantage of Polkadot's shared security. Whether you're building a standalone chain or deploying a parachain, this SDK equips developers with the libraries and tools needed to manage runtime logic, compile the codebase, and utilize the network's core features like staking, governance, and cross-chain communication.

!!! danger "Not Production Ready"
    This section is under construction. Expect frequent changes.

>     Agile coretime is not yet deployed on Polkadot and is only for the Kusama and TestNet networks. These features remain under development.  

Reviewer: This is outdated as Coretime is already live in Polkadot

        - [`polkadot-parachain`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/cumulus/polkadot-parachain){target=\_blank} - binary which implements a Polkadot collator for the parachain  
        - [`validate_block`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/1617852a2f1caec796f2b218aecae2facaeacad6/cumulus/pallets/parachain-system/src/validate_block){target=\_blank} - function that is expected by Polkadot to validate a state transition

    === "Resources"

        - Read the [Cumulus Overview](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/master/cumulus/docs/overview.md){target=\_blank}
        - [Cumulus installation and setup](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/cumulus#installation-and-setup){target=\_blank} - instructions to prepare your developer environment and launch a local network

For an in-depth dive into the monorepo, the [Polkadot SDK Rust documentation](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html){target=\_blank} is highly recommended

<!-- TODO: Glossary link ParaId -->

## Zero to Hero with The Polkadot SDK

> The Polkadot SDK is a versatile tool that can be used to build both standalone blockchains and parachains. For standalone blockchains, developers can leverage the SDK's components to create independent networks with custom functionality. The process for deploying a parachain on a Polkadot [core](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-agile-coretime#core){target=\_blank} can be summarized as follows:

Reviewer: I don't know if this section makes sense. No one who is trying to get what the Polkadot SDK is will understand what all of these steps mean

Author: Yeah, I'm happy to remove this section. Will refocus it.

### Deploying on a Core

After developing the desired runtime and implementing the necessary pallets, the next step is to deploy your parachain on a Polkadot core. This deployment process is crucial as it allows your parachain to leverage the shared security model of the Polkadot network. The deployment process involves several key steps:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph GA["Generate Artifacts"]
        direction LR
        A["Create a runtime"]-->B["Generate a chain specification"]-->C["Generate Genesis State & Runtime Artifacts"]
    end

    subgraph PC["Procure `ParaId` & Core"]
        direction LR
        PARAID["Reserve `ParaId`"]
        PARAID-->D["Buy Bulk Coretime"]
        PARAID-->E["Issue On-Demand Coretime Extrinsic"]
    end

    subgraph DEP["Deploying"]
        direction LR
        F["Register artifacts to `ParaId`"]-->assign["Assign Core"]-->G["Sync collator"]-->H["Begin producing blocks"]
    end

GA-->PC
PC-->DEP
```

<!-- TODO: We should probably have a link to guides or something here, or build some track which has them go from template to core? -->

<!-- TODO: Add a place / page to install the necessary dependencies -->

### Install Dependencies

> Ensure all necessary dependencies are installed.

Reviewer: Link installation page when ready

Author: Will merge main to here and link

<!-- TODO: Add a place / page to install the necessary dependencies -->

### Deployment Example - Adder Collator

> Try out the preceding example by deploying the adder collator, a very simple "counter" parachain implementation.

Reviewer: Add link @CrackTheCode016

> ## OpenZeppelin Templates & Guides

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we should include OpenZeppelin Templates as a section because they are already included in the  Polkadot SDK Templates link provided:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ea275bd4-894c-4f2e-ba08-ce10878d1c94)

Author: Agreed, will remove and just make it a general templates section.

Author: Actually, I will keep it as a sub-section, just so it is covered / mentioned from an SEO standpoint
